:state: Needed
:date: 2021-05-07
:labels: design

Theon Boot Loader and Hypatia Boot Process
==========================================

Describes the Theon boot loader and the process of starting
Hypatia.

Introducing Theon
-----------------

Hypatia is distributed as a set of separately compiled and
linked binary object files that are loaded and initialized at
initial boot by Theon, a cold boot agent.  By design, the system
as a whole is invoked by means of the hitless upgrade code path.
Theon's job is to load the system and produce state that can be
consumed by the upgrade path that will result in a freshly
booted system "resuming" execution on a newly initialized
system.

It is assumed some minimal early loader will load the Theon
binary and a Unix archive file containing the Hypatia binaries
into memory, then invoke Theon, passing it a reference to the
binary archive.

Theon is responsible for three things:

* Extracting and loading the Hypatia binaries into memory,
  invoking segment initializers, and producing task binary
  descriptions,
* Examining the host computer and creating descriptions of its
  hardware resources that can be serialized and passed to the
  rest of the system,
* Hand-crafting a minimal snapshot of system state sufficient to
  schedule the system task, resuming at its entry point, on
  system resumption.

The manner in which Theon accomplishes all three of these is
deliberately opaque to the rest of the system, which gives the
loader implementation flexibility.  However, once complete,
Theon serializes the state it has just created, and invokes the
rest of the system by passing that serialized state to the
upgrade path of the system supervisor.  On upgrade, the
supervisor is responsible for seeding the rest of the system's
components with whatever state it was passed.  In this manner,
we effectively always enter the hypervisor via the upgrade path,
even in the cold start case; this avoids special cases and
simplifies testing and implementation.  Further, complicated
and necessarily messy bootstrap logic is confined to a single
subsystem: Theon itself.

On advanced systems with minimal firmware, for example, complex
system-specific logic like CPU topology discovery or PCIe BAR
assignment can be restricted to Theon, while the rest of the
system relies on the contract Theon honors in providing an
accurate view of system resources.

Colophon
--------
Historically, Theon was Hypatia's father.
