:state: Needed
:date: 2021-05-07
:labels: design

Hypatia Tasks
=============

In Hypatia, tasks are independently scheduled flows of
execution.  They are conceptually similar to, and share
properties with, both threads and processes as in other
systems, but are dissimilar enough from both to warrant
their name.

Tasks resemble processes in that they are instances of executing
programs, but they are cooperatively scheduled.  Similarly, they
resemble threads by encapsulating a logical flow of execution,
but they own and run in their own address space.

The set of tasks in Hypatia is small and fixed, currently
limited to the system task, VM control tasks ("vm") and VCPU
tasks ("vcpu").  There is exactly one instance of the system
task per machine.

As its name implies, the vm control task is responsible for
coordinating and controlling an instance of a virtual machine,
while a vcpu task drives an instance of a single VCPU within a
virtual machine.  There many be many instances of each of these
types of task: one vm control task per virtual machine, and a
vcpu tasks for each configured VCPU.

Tasks tend to run in host kernel mode.

Task Sets
---------

Tasks are organized into task sets; all tasks are members of
exactly one task set.  The first task in a task set is the
_task set leader_.

For example, a VM is in a task set consisting of a single VM
control task, which is the task set leader, as well as one or
more VCPU tasks: one for each configured VCPU in the virtual
machine.

Task sets have the property that members can share a portion of
their address space; this is the _task set area_ that is
described in the system memory HDP.  This area is owned by the
task set leader, but exposed mapped into the address space of
the other members of the set: this allows members of a task set
to coordinate via shared memory.  The posted interrupt
descriptor for a VCPU is mapped into this area, for example, so
that VCPUs may easily send each other IPIs.

External Communications
-----------------------

Communication with a task is via means of a slotted mailbox:
this is a mappable data structure that may be modeled as an
array of messages and their responses; the mailbox is sized so
that each element can hold the largest message that can be sent,
as well as its response.

Address Spaces
--------------

As mentioned, each task runs in its own address space.  That
address space can map segments from the larger system, as well
as the task set's shared address space.  Tasks of a particular
type also tend to share text and read-only data, but otherwise,
have their own their private stack and read-write data segment
described by their own page tables.

Bootstrapping
-------------

The supervisor segment is automatically initialized by the
bootstrap program when the system is initialized: for coldboot,
the "theon" loader loads the system task binary into memory,
then creates a scheduler descriptor for the task, crafted to
"return" to the task's entry point.  It then serializes this
scheduler descriptor, along with a description of the rest of
the system, and invokes supervisor entry point for
initializaton, passing the serialized system description as the
sole argument.  The effect is that the machine will be
initialized with a scheduleable single task, the system task,
set to resume in its initialization path.  Theon then
trampolines into the scheduler through the "holding" kernel
(which also destroys the theon image), effectively removing
itself from the existence.

Theon is responsible for partially loading task binaries.  It
parses the binary files, creating a minimal representation of
the binary's text, read-only data, read-write data, and stack
requirements that is then passed into a supervisor call.  The
supervisor takes ownership of this partially loaded task image.

Management
----------

Creation, deletion, and other similar management of tasks is
accomplished by calls to the supervisor.  The supervisor owns
the parsed and partially loaded task data and creates a new task
by allocating an address space, mapping (and copying) the task
image data into the new task, and then setting it runnable in
the scheduler.

Scheduling
----------

For scheduling purposes, tasks are described by a minimal _task
descriptor_, which contains a task identifier (an integer), the
identifier of an affine task that can be co-scheduled on the
same physical CPU core (or none if the task must be exclusively
scheduled on the core) the physical address of the page-table
root pointer for the task's address space, and the address of a
stack within that address space.

Tasks are cooperatively scheduled.  A task may arrange to
interrupt itself, but it will always voluntarily yield the
processor by calling into the scheduler segment.

The Hypatia scheduler keeps track of what tasks are assigned to
what CPU threads, and uses a simple, table-driven approach to
scheduling, while respecting the affinity constraints of
individual tasks so that for instance, VCPU tasks assigned to
paired hyperthreads in the guest are co-scheduled on physical
host hyperthreads.

The scheduler is written in terms of minimal task descriptors
that are designed to avoid leaking private information, so that
the it can be invoked without introducing speculative attack
vulnerabilities.
